VHDL-2008 Features
==================

The VHDL-2008 standard (IEEE 1076-2008) introduced several significant improvements that make the language more concise, flexible, and powerful. Most modern synthesis and simulation tools (Vivado, Quartus, ModelSim) have strong support for VHDL-2008.

-----------------------
1. Simplified Sensitivity Lists
-----------------------

Instead of listing every signal in a combinational process, you can use the keyword `all`.

.. code-block:: vhdl

   -- Before 2008
   process (a, b, c, d, sel)
   -- VHDL-2008
   process (all)
   begin
       -- ...
   end process;

-----------------------
2. Enhanced Logic Operators
-----------------------

VHDL-2008 allows unary logical operators for reduction, similar to Verilog.

.. code-block:: vhdl

   -- Returns '1' if any bit in the vector is '1'
   any_bit_high <= or data_vector;

-----------------------
3. Better Generic Support
-----------------------

- **Generics in Packages**: You can now define generics for entire packages.
- **Generic Types**: You can pass a **type** as a generic parameter to a module.

-----------------------
4. External Names (Hierarchical References)
-----------------------

VHDL-2008 allows you to access signals deep within the design hierarchy from your testbench using external names. This is extremely useful for verification without adding extra ports to every module.

.. code-block:: vhdl

   alias probe_sig : std_logic is << signal .tb.uut.sub_inst.internal_sig : std_logic >>;

-----------------------
5. Fixed and Floating Point Packages
-----------------------

VHDL-2008 includes standardized packages for fixed-point (`fixed_pkg`) and floating-point (`float_pkg`) arithmetic, which were previously vendor-specific or required external libraries.

-----------------------
6. Simplified I/O and Strings
-----------------------

Improvements to the `textio` package and the ability to use string expressions in port maps make testbench development much smoother.

-----------------------
7. Logical Operators for `std_logic_vector`
-----------------------

Previously, operators like `and` or `or` between two `std_logic_vector` signals required a loop or a conversion. In VHDL-2008, these work as expected.

.. code-block:: vhdl

   res <= vec_a and vec_b; -- Bitwise AND

-----------------------
Enabling VHDL-2008
-----------------------

To use these features, you must tell your synthesis or simulation tool to use the VHDL-2008 standard.
- **Vivado**: Set the file type to "VHDL 2008" in the file properties.
- **ModelSim**: Use the `-2008` flag with `vcom`.
- **GHDL**: Use the `--std=08` flag.

-----------------------
Further Reading
-----------------------

For more hardware design tutorials, visit **Agus L. Setiawan** at `Technolati.com <https://www.technolati.com/>`_.

